# Bay Wheels Bike Share Program

## Introduction

**Bike sharing systems** are a means of renting bicycles where the process of obtaining membership, rental, and bike return is automated via a network of kiosk locations throughout an urban area. Using these systems, people are able to rent a bike from a one location and return it to a different place on an as-needed basis. Currently, there are over 500 bike-sharing programs around the world, involving more than 500 thousand bicycles. Nowadays, there is a great interest in these systems due to their important role in traffic, environmental and health issues.

Apart from interesting real world applications of bike sharing systems, the characteristics of the data generated by these systems makes them attractive for researchers. Opposed to other transport services such as bus or subway, the duration of travel, departure location, arrival location and time elapsed is explicitly recorded. This feature turns bike sharing system into a virtual sensor network, which can be used for studying mobility within the area. Hence, it is expected that most of important events in the area could be detected via monitoring these data.

This example combines historical usage patterns of the Capital Bikeshare program in Washington, D.C. with weather data in order to forecast bike rental demand. The demand data were extracted from the two-year historical log corresponding to years 2011 and 2012, publicly available at `capitalbikeshare.com/system-data`. The weather information was been extracted from `freemeteo.com`.

## The data set

The data set, consisting of 17,379 hourly observations, comes in the file `capital.csv`. The variables included are:

* Timestamp (`datetime`), as yyyy-mm-dd hh:mm:ss.

* Weather (`weather`), with 'clear, few clouds or partly cloudy' coded as 1, 'mist and cloudy, mist and broken clouds, mist and few clouds or mist' as 2, 'light snow, light rain and thunderstorm and scattered clouds or light rain and scattered clouds as 3, and 'heavy rain and ice pallets and thunderstorm and mist or snow and fog' as 4.

* Temperature in Celsius (`temp`).

* Relative humidity in percentage scale (`humidity`).

* Wind speed in Km/h (`windspeed`).

* Number of non-registered user rentals initiated (`casual`).

* Number of registered user rentals initiated (`registered`).

Source: H Fanaee-T & J Gama (2013), Event labeling combining ensemble detectors and background knowledge, *Progress in Artificial Intelligence* **2**(2), 113-127.

## Questions

Q1. Is there a time trend in the number of rentals per unit of time?

Q2. Can you describe in an easy way the pattern for intraday variation of the number of rides? Is this pattern different for registered and casual users?

Q3. Same questions for intraweek variation.

Q4. What about monthly seasonality?

Q5. What is the main source of variability in the rentals, the hour of the day, the day of week or the month?